GWEN IFILL: Netflix has
announced its video
streaming service will soon be
available globally,
leading to a wider audience for
its movies
and original programming.
There is no bigger hit on
Netflix right now
than "Making a Murderer," the
story of a brutal
case in Wisconsin that raises
troubling questions
about our criminal justice
system.
William Brangham has the story.
And a warning: If you have not
seen the series,
like me, there are some spoilers
ahead.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: "Making a
Murderer" is the
new blockbuster true crime
series on Netflix.
In 10 hour-long episodes,
filmmakers Laura
Ricciardi and Moira Demos tell
the story of
Steven Avery, a Wisconsin man
who spent 18
years locked up for a sexual
assault he didn't
commit.
But, after his release, Avery
was arrested
for a new crime, the gruesome
murder of a
young photographer named Teresa
Halbach.
STEVEN AVERY, Suspect: I didn't
do it.
MAN: Who did it?
STEVEN AVERY: I don't know.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The series
documents, in
incredible detail, the
investigation and prosecution
of Avery, and his young nephew,
Brendan Dassey.
Both men were found guilty, are
now serving
life sentences for Halbach's
death.
The series raises some troubling
questions
about how investigators and
prosecutors pursued
the case. For example, was
then-16-year-old
Brendan Dassey coerced into
making a false
confession?
MAN: Who shot her in the head?
BRENDAN DASSEY, Suspect: He did.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Was crucial
evidence linking
Avery to the crime in fact
planted by police?
And were police trying to frame
him because
Avery was suing them for $36
million over
his earlier wrongful conviction
in the sexual
assault case?
"Making a Murderer" was released
in its entirety
just before Christmas, and it's
quickly become
a runaway success for Netflix.
Tens of thousands
of viewers are so convinced of
Steven Avery's
and Brendan Dassey's innocence
that they have
signed online petitions to
President Obama
and to the governor of
Wisconsin, demanding
the men be pardoned immediately.
Yesterday, I spoke with the
filmmakers, Ricciardi
and Demos, who spent 10 years
documenting
this story.
So, what was it that first
attracted you two
to this story?
MOIRA DEMOS, Filmmaker, "Making
a Murderer":
Here was a man who had been
clearly failed
by our justice system in the
mid-'80s, and
here he was now thrown back into
the system,
and we were in a position where
we could follow
that case as it unfolded.
It's not really about the
question of, did
Steven do this or he did not do
this, but
really, can we trust, we can
rely on these
verdicts? And what we felt like
that offered
and what Steven's experiences
offered us was
this amazing window into the
system.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The prosecutor
in this murder
case, Ken Kratz, has been on a
full-bore media
blitz recently, denouncing the
series, saying
it's extremely misleading, and
rejecting the
allegation that Steven Avery was
framed.
KEN KRATZ, Prosecutor: This
wasn't a documentary
at all. This was a defense
piece. It was generated
by and for Steven Avery by his
defense team.
If some of the evidence that was
selected,
I would call it handpicked or
cherry-picked,
over an 18-month period, didn't
fit with the
narrative, didn't fit with the
conclusion
that Mr. Avery was the product
of a conspiracy
or some planted evidence, it's
my belief that
the filmmakers just wouldn't
include that
information.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Kratz argues
that several
crucial pieces of evidence were
either glossed
over by the Netflix series or
left out altogether,
for example, the fact that
Steven Avery called
the murder victim several times
on the day
that she disappeared, or the
fact that Steven
Avery's own DNA showed up on the
victim's
car keys, on the hood of her
car, and inside
her car.
I mean, the prosecutor says that
you guys,
the filmmakers, didn't include
certain pieces
of evidence because -- quote --
"You didn't
want to muddy up a perfectly
good conspiracy
movie with what actually
happened."
MOIRA DEMOS: I guess I would say
he didn't
want to muddy up a perfectly
good prosecution
with what actually happened.
I mean, we included the evidence
that Kratz
himself spoke about in press
conferences as
being the most damning pieces of
evidence
of Avery's guilt, the most
significant physical
pieces evidence. We were
following his lead
of what to include. And, of
course, we couldn't
include everything from a
six-week trial.
And now the things he is saying
are the proof
of Steven's guilt were not the
things he was
hanging his case on.
LAURA RICCIARDI, Filmmaker,
"Making a Murderer":
Well, I have said before that we
had no horse
in this race. We -- whether
Steven Avery committed
the horrible crime with which he
was charged
or not was of no consequence to
us as documentarians.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: "Making a
Murderer" is just
the latest in a recent line of
extremely popular
reexaminations of old criminal
cases.
Of course, there was "Serial,"
the blockbuster
podcast that, in its first
season, scrutinized
the late '90s conviction of a
Maryland teenager
for the murder of his
ex-girlfriend, and HBO's
popular miniseries "The Jinx,"
which looked
into the crimes of accused
murderer Robert
Durst.
Your series obviously comes in a
long line
of these true crime cases of
late. And I wonder
why they are so, so popular with
their audiences.
Why do you think these stories
speak to us
so strongly?
MOIRA DEMOS: I guess, not
always, but quite
often, true crime revolves a
marginal character,
an underdog, so to speak. And I
think most
people feel like underdogs in
their own lives.
And they can attach to that
feeling.
And then, of course, this is
true crime. This
is real life. And there is
something very
immediate about that. The fact
that people
can do something with the
feelings they have
after they watch, I think, just
adds a layer
of intensity to it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As for those
pardons, President
Obama can't do anything about
this, because
these weren't federal
convictions.
Wisconsin's governor, Scott
Walker, could
do something, but he recently
threw cold water
on the idea.
GOV. SCOTT WALKER (R),
Wisconsin: Just because
a documentary on TV says
something doesn't
mean that is actually what the
evidence shows.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For now,
Steven Avery remains
in jail for life. Brendan Dassey
won't be
eligible for parole until 2048.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.